Neurodevelopmental 
Disorders 


The neurod evelopmental disorders are a group of conditions with onset in the 
developmental period. The disorders typically manifest early in development, often be- 
fore the child enters grade school, and are characterized by developmental deficits that 
produce impairments of personal, social, academic, or occupational functioning. The 
range of developmental deficits varies from very specific limitations of learning or control 
of executive functions to global impairments of social skills or intelligence. The neurode- 
velopmental disorders frequently co-occur; for example, individuals with autism spec- 
trum disorder often have intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder), and 
many children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) also have a specific 
learning disorder. For some disorders, the clinical presentation includes symptoms of ex- 
cess as well as deficits and delays in achieving expected milestones. For example, autism 
spectrum disorder is diagnosed only when the characteristic deficits of social communi- 
cation are accompanied by excessively repetitive behaviors, restricted interests, and insis- 
tence on sameness. 

Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) is characterized by deficits 
in general mental abilities, such as reasoning, problem solving, planning, abstract thinking, 
judgment, academic learning, and learning from experience. The deficits result in impair- 
ments of adaptive functioning, such that the individual fails to meet standards of personal 
independence and social responsibility in one or more aspects of daily life, including com- 
munication, social participation, academic or occupational functioning, and personal inde- 
pendence at home or in community settings. Global developmental delay, as its name 
implies, is diagnosed when an individual fails to meet expected developmental milestones 
in several areas of intellectual functioning. The diagnosis is used for individuals who are 
unable to undergo systematic assessments of intellectual functioning, including children 
who are too young to participate in standardized testing. Intellectual disability may result 
from an acquired insult during the developmental period from, for example, a severe head 
injury, in which case a neurocognitive disorder also may be diagnosed. 

The communication disorders include language disorder, speech sound disorder, so- 
cial (pragmatic) communication disorder, and childhood-onset fluency disorder (stutter- 
ing). The first three disorders are characterized by deficits in the development and use of 
language, speech, and social communication, respectively. Childhood-onset fluency dis- 
order is characterized by disturbances of the normal fluency and motor production of 
speech, including repetitive sounds or syllables, prolongation of consonants or vowel 
sounds, broken words, blocking, or words produced with an excess of physical tension. 
Like other neurodevelopmental disorders, communication disorders begin early in life 
and may produce lifelong functional impairments. 

Autism spectrum disorder is characterized by persistent deficits in social communica- 
tion and social interaction across multiple contexts, including deficits in social reciprocity, 
nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction, and skills in developing, 
maintaining, and understanding relationships. In addition to the social communication 
deficits, the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder requires the presence of restricted, re- 
petitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities. Because symptoms change with de- 
velopment and may be masked by compensatory mechanisms, the diagnostic criteria may 


31 


32 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


be met based on historical information, although the current presentation must cause sig- 
nificant impairment. 

Within the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder, individual clinical characteristics 
are noted through the use of specifiers (with or without accompanying intellectual impair- 
ment; with or without accompanying structural language impairment; associated with a 
known medical/genetic or environmental/acquired condition; associated with another 
neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral disorder), as well as specifiers that describe 
the autistic symptoms (age at first concern; with or without loss of established skills; sever- 
ity). These specifiers provide clinicians with an opportunity to individualize the diagnosis 
and communicate a richer clinical description of the affected individuals. For example, many 
individuals previously diagnosed with Asperger’s disorder would now receive a diagnosis 
of autism spectrum disorder without language or intellectual impairment. 

ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder defined by impairing levels of inattention, dis- 
organization, and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity. Inattention and disorganization entail inabil- 
ity to stay on task, seeming not to listen, and losing materials, at levels that are inconsistent 
with age or developmental level. Hyperactivity-impulsivity entails overactivity, fidgeting, in- 
ability to stay seated, intruding into other people’s activities, and inability to wait—symptoms 
that are excessive for age or developmental level. In childhood, ADHD frequently overlaps 
with disorders that are often considered to be “externalizing disorders,” such as oppositional 
defiant disorder and conduct disorder. ADHD often persists into adulthood, with resultant 
impairments of social, academic and occupational functioning. 

The neurodevelopmental motor disorders include developmental coordination disor- 
der, stereotypic movement disorder, and tic disorders. Developmental coordination dis- 
order is characterized by deficits in the acquisition and execution of coordinated motor 
skills and is manifested by clumsiness and slowness or inaccuracy of performance of mo- 
tor skills that cause interference with activities of daily living. Stereotypic movement dis- 
order is diagnosed when an individual has repetitive, seemingly driven, and apparently 
purposeless motor behaviors, such as hand flapping, body rocking, head banging, self- 
biting, or hitting. The movements interfere with social, academic, or other activities. If the 
behaviors cause self-injury, this should be specified as part of the diagnostic description. 
Tic disorders are characterized by the presence of motor or vocal tics, which are sudden, 
rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic, sterotyped motor movements or vocalizations. The dura- 
tion, presumed etiology, and clinical presentation define the specific tic disorder that is di- 
agnosed: Tourette’s disorder, persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder, provisional 
tic disorder, other specified tic disorder, and unspecified tic disorder. Tourette’s disorder 
is diagnosed when the individual has multiple motor and vocal tics that have been present 
for at least 1 year and that have a waxing-waning symptom course. 

Specific learning disorder, as the name implies, is diagnosed when there are specific defi- 
cits in an individual's ability to perceive or process information efficiently and accurately. This 
neurodevelopmental disorder first manifests during the years of formal schooling and is 
characterized by persistent and impairing difficulties with learning foundational academic 
skills in reading, writing, and/or math. The individual’s performance of the affected academic 
skills is well below average for age, or acceptable performance levels are achieved only with 
extraordinary effort. Specific learning disorder may occur in individuals identified as intellec- 
tually gifted and manifest only when the learning demands or assessment procedures (e.g., 
timed tests) pose barriers that cannot be overcome by their innate intelligence and compensa- 
tory strategies. For all individuals, specific learning disorder can produce lifelong impairments 
in activities dependent on the skills, including occupational performance. 

The use of specifiers for the neurodevelopmental disorder diagnoses enriches the clin- 
ical description of the individual's clinical course and current symptomatology. In addi- 
tion to specifiers that describe the clinical presentation, such as age at onset or severity 
ratings, the neurodevelopmental disorders may include the specifier “associated with a 
known medical or genetic condition or environmental factor.” This specifier gives clini- 


Intellectual Disability (Intellectual Developmental Disorder) 33 


cians an opportunity to document factors that may have played a role in the etiology of the 
disorder, as well as those that might affect the clinical course. Examples include genetic 
disorders, such as fragile X syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, and Rett syndrome; medical con- 
ditions such as epilepsy; and environmental factors, including very low birth weight and 
fetal alcohol exposure (even in the absence of stigmata of fetal alcohol syndrome). 


Intellectual Disabilities 


Intellectual Disability 
(Intellectual Developmental Disorder) 


Diagnostic Criteria 


Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) is a disorder with onset during 
the developmental period that includes both intellectual and adaptive functioning deficits 
in conceptual, social, and practical domains. The following three criteria must be met: 

A. Deficits in intellectual functions, such as reasoning, problem solving, planning, abstract 
thinking, judgment, academic learning, and learning from experience, confirmed by 
both clinical assessment and individualized, standardized intelligence testing. 

B. Deficits in adaptive functioning that result in failure to meet developmental and socio- 
cultural standards for personal independence and social responsibility. Without ongo- 
ing support, the adaptive deficits limit functioning in one or more activities of daily life, 
such as communication, social participation, and independent living, across multiple 
environments, such as home, school, work, and community. 

C. Onset of intellectual and adaptive deficits during the developmental period. 


Note: The diagnostic term intellectual disability is the equivalent term for the ICD-11 diag- 
nosis of intellectual developmental disorders. Although the term intellectual disability is 
used throughout this manual, both terms are used in the title to clarify relationships with 
other classification systems. Moreover, a federal statute in the United States (Public Law 
111-256, Rosa’s Law) replaces the term mental retardation with intellectual disability, and 
research journals use the term intellectual disability. Thus, intellectual disability is the 
term in common use by medical, educational, and other professions and by the lay public 
and advocacy groups. 
Specify current severity (See Table 1): 

317 (F70) Mild 

318.0 (F71) Moderate 

318.1 (F72) Severe 

318.2 (F73) Profound 


Specifiers 

The various levels of severity are defined on the basis of adaptive functioning, and not IQ 
scores, because it is adaptive functioning that determines the level of supports required. 
Moreover, IQ measures are less valid in the lower end of the IQ range. 


TABLE 1 Severity levels for intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) 


Severity 


level Social domain Practical domain 


ve 


Conceptual domain 


For preschool children, there 
may be no obvious conceptual 
differences. For school-age 
children and adults, there are 
difficulties in learning aca- 
demic skills involving reading, 
writing, arithmetic, time, or 
money, with support needed 
in one or more areas to meet 
age-related expectations. In 
adults, abstract thinking, exec- 
utive function (i.e., planning, 
strategizing, priority setting, 
and cognitive flexibility), and 
short-term memory, as well as 
functional use of academic 
skills (e.g., reading, money 
management), are impaired. 
There is a somewhat concrete 
approach to problems and 
solutions compared with 
age-mates. 


Compared with typically developing age- 
mates, the individual is immature in social 
interactions. For example, there may be diffi- 
culty in accurately perceiving peers’ social 
cues. Communication, conversation, and lan- 
guage are more concrete or immature than 
expected for age. There may be difficulties reg- 
ulating emotion and behavior in age-appropri- 
ate fashion; these difficulties are noticed by 
peers in social situations. There is limited 
understanding of risk in social situations; 
social judgment is immature for age, and 
the person is at risk of being manipulated 
by others (gullibility). 


The individual may function age-appropriately in 
personal care. Individuals need some support with 
complex daily living tasks in comparison to peers. In 
adulthood, supports typically involve grocery shop- 
ping, transportation, home and child-care organiz- 
ing, nutritious food preparation, and banking and 
money management. Recreational skills resemble 
those of age-mates, although judgment related to 
well-being and organization around recreation 
requires support. In adulthood, competitive 
employment is often seen in jobs that do not empha- 
size conceptual skills. Individuals generally need 
support to make health care decisions and legal 
decisions, and to learn to perform a skilled vocation 
competently. Support is typically needed to raise a 
family. 


sJepsosiq je]uswdojeAepoineNn 


TABLE 1 Severity levels for intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) (continued) 


Severity 


level Conceptual domain 


Moderate | All through development, the 
individual’s conceptual skills 
lag markedly behind those of 
peers. For preschoolers, lan- 
guage and pre-academic skills 
develop slowly. For school-age 
children, progress in reading, 
writing, mathematics, and 
understanding of time and 
money occurs slowly across 
the school years and is mark- 
edly limited compared with 
that of peers. For adults, aca- 
demic skill development is 
typically at an elementary 
level, and support is required 
for all use of academic skills in 
work and personal life. Ongo- 
ing assistance on a daily basis 
is needed to complete concep- 
tual tasks of day-to-day life, 
and others may take over these 
responsibilities fully for the 
individual. 


Social domain 


The individual shows marked differences from 


peers in social and communicative behavior 
across development. Spoken language is typi- 
cally a primary tool for social communication 
but is much less complex than that of peers. 
Capacity for relationships is evident in ties to 
family and friends, and the individual may 
have successful friendships across life and 
sometimes romantic relations in adulthood. 
However, individuals may not perceive or 
interpret social cues accurately. Social judg- 
ment and decision-making abilities are lim- 
ited, and caretakers must assist the person 
with life decisions. Friendships with typically 
developing peers are often affected by com- 
munication or social limitations. Significant 
social and communicative support is needed 
in work settings for success. 


Practical domain 


The individual can care for personal needs involving 
eating, dressing, elimination, and hygiene as an 
adult, although an extended period of teaching and 
time is needed for the individual to become indepen- 
dent in these areas, and reminders may be needed. 
Similarly, participation in all household tasks can be 
achieved by adulthood, although an extended 
period of teaching is needed, and ongoing supports 
will typically occur for adult-level performance. 
Independent employment in jobs that require lim- 
ited conceptual and communication skills can be 
achieved, but considerable support from co-work- 
ers, supervisors, and others is needed to manage 
social expectations, job complexities, and ancillary 
responsibilities such as scheduling, transportation, 
health benefits, and money management. A variety 
of recreational skills can be developed. These typi- 
cally require additional supports and learning 
opportunities over an extended period of time. 
Maladaptive behavior is present in a significant 
minority and causes social problems. 


(Jepuosiq jejusudojenggq jenyoeyjequy) Aujiqesiq jenjoe||e1u| 


ce 


TABLE 1 Severity levels for intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) (continued) 


Severity 


level Conceptual domain 


Attainment of conceptual skills 
is limited. The individual gen- 
erally has little understanding 
of written language or of con- 
cepts involving numbers, 
quantity, time, and money. 
Caretakers provide extensive 
supports for problem solving 
throughout life. 


Profound | Conceptual skills generally 
involve the physical world 
rather than symbolic pro- 
cesses. The individual may use 
objects in goal-directed fashion 
for self-care, work, and recre- 
ation. Certain visuospatial 
skills, such as matching and 
sorting based on physical char- 
acteristics, may be acquired. 
However, co-occurring motor 
and sensory impairments may 
prevent functional use of 
objects. 


Social domain 


Spoken language is quite limited in terms of 
vocabulary and grammar. Speech may be sin- 
gle words or phrases and may be supple- 
mented through augmentative means. Speech 
and communication are focused on the here 
and now within everyday events. Language is 
used for social communication more than for 
explication. Individuals understand simple 
speech and gestural communication. Relation- 
ships with family members and familiar others 
are a source of pleasure and help. 


The individual has very limited understanding 
of symbolic communication in speech or ges- 
ture. He or she may understand some simple 
instructions or gestures. The individual 
expresses his or her own desires and emotions 
largely through nonverbal, nonsymbolic com- 
munication. The individual enjoys relation- 
ships with well-known family members, 
caretakers, and familiar others, and initiates 
and responds to social interactions through 
gestural and emotional cues. Co-occurring 
sensory and physical impairments may pre- 
vent many social activities. 


Practical domain 


The individual requires support for all activities of 
daily living, including meals, dressing, bathing, and 
elimination. The individual requires supervision at 
all times. The individual cannot make responsible 
decisions regarding well-being of self or others. In 
adulthood, participation in tasks at home, recre- 
ation, and work requires ongoing support and assis- 
tance. Skill acquisition in all domains involves long- 
term teaching and ongoing support. Maladaptive 
behavior, including self-injury, is present in a signif- 
icant minority. 


The individual is dependent on others for all aspects of 
daily physical care, health, and safety, although he or 
she may be able to participate in some of these activi- 
ties as well. Individuals without severe physical 
impairments may assist with some daily work tasks at 
home, like carrying dishes to the table. Simple actions 
with objects may be the basis of participation in some 
vocational activities with high levels of ongoing sup- 
port. Recreational activities may involve, for example, 
enjoyment in listening to music, watching movies, 
going out for walks, or participating in water activi- 
ties, all with the support of others. Co-occurring 
physical and sensory impairments are frequent 
barriers to participation (beyond watching) in home, 
recreational, and vocational activities. Maladaptive 
behavior is present in a significant minority. 


9€ 


sJepsosiq je]JusudojeAeposneNn 


Intellectual Disability (Intellectual Developmental Disorder) 37 


Diagnostic Features 


The essential features of intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) are 
deficits in general mental abilities (Criterion A) and impairment in everyday adaptive 
functioning, in comparison to an individual’s age-, gender-, and socioculturally matched 
peers (Criterion B). Onset is during the developmental period (Criterion C). The diagnosis 
of intellectual disability is based on both clinical assessment and standardized testing of 
intellectual and adaptive functions. 

Criterion A refers to intellectual functions that involve reasoning, problem solving, 
planning, abstract thinking, judgment, learning from instruction and experience, and 
practical understanding. Critical components include verbal comprehension, working 
memory, perceptual reasoning, quantitative reasoning, abstract thought, and cognitive ef- 
ficacy. Intellectual functioning is typically measured with individually administered and 
psychometrically valid, comprehensive, culturally appropriate, psychometrically sound 
tests of intelligence. Individuals with intellectual disability have scores of approximately 
two standard deviations or more below the population mean, including a margin for mea- 
surement error (generally +5 points). On tests with a standard deviation of 15 and a mean 
of 100, this involves a score of 65-75 (70 + 5). Clinical training and judgment are required 
to interpret test results and assess intellectual performance. 

Factors that may affect test scores include practice effects and the “Flynn effect’ (i.e., 
overly high scores due to out-of-date test norms). Invalid scores may result from the use of 
brief intelligence screening tests or group tests; highly discrepant individual subtest scores 
may make an overall IQ score invalid. Instruments must be normed for the individual's so- 
ciocultural background and native language. Co-occurring disorders that affect communi- 
cation, language, and/or motor or sensory function may affect test scores. Individual 
cognitive profiles based on neuropsychological testing are more useful for understanding 
intellectual abilities than a single IQ score. Such testing may identify areas of relative 
strengths and weaknesses, an assessment important for academic and vocational planning. 

IQ test scores are approximations of conceptual functioning but may be insufficient to 
assess reasoning in real-life situations and mastery of practical tasks. For example, a per- 
son with an IQ score above 70 may have such severe adaptive behavior problems in social 
judgment, social understanding, and other areas of adaptive functioning that the person’s 
actual functioning is comparable to that of individuals with a lower IQ score. Thus, clinical 
judgment is needed in interpreting the results of IQ tests. 

Deficits in adaptive functioning (Criterion B) refer to how well a person meets community 
standards of personal independence and social responsibility, in comparison to others of sim- 
ilar age and sociocultural background. Adaptive functioning involves adaptive reasoning in 
three domains: conceptual, social, and practical. The conceptual (academic) domain involves 
competence in memory, language, reading, writing, math reasoning, acquisition of practical 
knowledge, problem solving, and judgment in novel situations, among others. The social do- 
main involves awareness of others’ thoughts, feelings, and experiences; empathy; interper- 
sonal communication skills; friendship abilities; and social judgment, among others. The 
practical domain involves learning and self-management across life settings, including personal 
care, job responsibilities, money management, recreation, self-management of behavior, and 
school and work task organization, among others. Intellectual capacity, education, motivation, 
socialization, personality features, vocational opportunity, cultural experience, and coexisting 
general medical conditions or mental disorders influence adaptive functioning. 

Adaptive functioning is assessed using both clinical evaluation and individualized, 
culturally appropriate, psychometrically sound measures. Standardized measures are 
used with knowledgeable informants (e.g., parent or other family member; teacher; coun- 
selor; care provider) and the individual to the extent possible. Additional sources of infor- 
mation include educational, developmental, medical, and mental health evaluations. 
Scores from standardized measures and interview sources must be interpreted using clin- 
ical judgment. When standardized testing is difficult or impossible, because of a variety of 


38 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


factors (e.g., sensory impairment, severe problem behavior), the individual may be diag- 
nosed with unspecified intellectual disability. Adaptive functioning may be difficult to 
assess in a controlled setting (e.g., prisons, detention centers); if possible, corroborative in- 
formation reflecting functioning outside those settings should be obtained. 

Criterion B is met when at least one domain of adaptive functioning—conceptual, so- 
cial, or practical—is sufficiently impaired that ongoing support is needed in order for the 
person to perform adequately in one or more life settings at school, at work, at home, or in 
the community. To meet diagnostic criteria for intellectual disability, the deficits in adap- 
tive functioning must be directly related to the intellectual impairments described in Cri- 
terion A. Criterion C, onset during the developmental period, refers to recognition that 
intellectual and adaptive deficits are present during childhood or adolescence. 


Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 


Intellectual disability is a heterogeneous condition with multiple causes. There may be 
associated difficulties with social judgment; assessment of risk; self-management of behav- 
ior, emotions, or interpersonal relationships; or motivation in school or work environments. 
Lack of communication skills may predispose to disruptive and aggressive behaviors. Gull- 
ibility is often a feature, involving naiveté in social situations and a tendency for being easily 
led by others. Gullibility and lack of awareness of risk may result in exploitation by others 
and possible victimization, fraud, unintentional criminal involvement, false confessions, 
and risk for physical and sexual abuse. These associated features can be important in crim- 
inal cases, including Atkins-type hearings involving the death penalty. 

Individuals with a diagnosis of intellectual disability with co-occurring mental disor- 
ders are at risk for suicide. They think about suicide, make suicide attempts, and may die 
from them. Thus, screening for suicidal thoughts is essential in the assessment process. Be- 
cause of a lack of awareness of risk and danger, accidental injury rates may be increased. 


Prevalence 


Intellectual disability has an overall general population prevalence of approximately 1%, 
and prevalence rates vary by age. Prevalence for severe intellectual disability is approxi- 
mately 6 per 1,000. 


Development and Course 


Onset of intellectual disability is in the developmental period. The age and characteristic 
features at onset depend on the etiology and severity of brain dysfunction. Delayed motor, 
language, and social milestones may be identifiable within the first 2 years of life among 
those with more severe intellectual disability, while mild levels may not be identifiable un- 
til school age when difficulty with academic learning becomes apparent. All criteria (in- 
cluding Criterion C) must be fulfilled by history or current presentation. Some children 
under age 5 years whose presentation will eventually meet criteria for intellectual disabil- 
ity have deficits that meet criteria for global developmental delay. 

When intellectual disability is associated with a genetic syndrome, there may be a char- 
acteristic physical appearance (as in, e.g., Down syndrome). Some syndromes have a 
behavioral phenotype, which refers to specific behaviors that are characteristic of particular 
genetic disorder (e.g., Lesch-Nyhan syndrome). In acquired forms, the onset may be 
abrupt following an illness such as meningitis or encephalitis or head trauma occurring 
during the developmental period. When intellectual disability results from a loss of pre- 
viously acquired cognitive skills, as in severe traumatic brain injury, the diagnoses of in- 
tellectual disability and of a neurocognitive disorder may both be assigned. 

Although intellectual disability is generally nonprogressive, in certain genetic disor- 
ders (e.g., Rett syndrome) there are periods of worsening, followed by stabilization, and in 


Intellectual Disability (Intellectual Developmental Disorder) 39 


others (e.g., San Phillippo syndrome) progressive worsening of intellectual function. After 
early childhood, the disorder is generally lifelong, although severity levels may change 
over time. The course may be influenced by underlying medical or genetic conditions and 
co-occurring conditions (e.g., hearing or visual impairments, epilepsy). Early and ongoing in- 
terventions may improve adaptive functioning throughout childhood and adulthood. In 
some cases, these result in significant improvement of intellectual functioning, such that 
the diagnosis of intellectual disability is no longer appropriate. Thus, it is common practice 
when assessing infants and young children to delay diagnosis of intellectual disability un- 
til after an appropriate course of intervention is provided. For older children and adults, 
the extent of support provided may allow for full participation in all activities of daily liv- 
ing and improved adaptive function. Diagnostic assessments must determine whether im- 
proved adaptive skills are the result of a stable, generalized new skill acquisition (in which 
case the diagnosis of intellectual disability may no longer be appropriate) or whether the 
improvement is contingent on the presence of supports and ongoing interventions (in 
which case the diagnosis of intellectual disability may still be appropriate). 


Risk and Prognostic Factors 


Genetic and physiological. Prenatal etiologies include genetic syndromes (e.g., se- 
quence variations or copy number variants involving one or more genes; chromosomal 
disorders), inborn errors of metabolism, brain malformations, maternal disease (including 
placental disease), and environmental influences (e.g., alcohol, other drugs, toxins, terato- 
gens). Perinatal causes include a variety of labor and delivery-related events leading to 
neonatal encephalopathy. Postnatal causes include hypoxic ischemic injury, traumatic 
brain injury, infections, demyelinating disorders, seizure disorders (e.g., infantile spasms), 
severe and chronic social deprivation, and toxic metabolic syndromes and intoxications 
(e.g., lead, mercury). 


Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 


Intellectual disability occurs in all races and cultures. Cultural sensitivity and knowledge 
are needed during assessment, and the individual's ethnic, cultural, and linguistic back- 
ground, available experiences, and adaptive functioning within his or her community and 
cultural setting must be taken into account. 


Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues 


Overall, males are more likely than females to be diagnosed with both mild (average 
male:female ratio 1.6:1) and severe (average male:female ratio 1.2:1) forms of intellectual 
disability. However, gender ratios vary widely in reported studies. Sex-linked genetic fac- 
tors and male vulnerability to brain insult may account for some of the gender differences. 


Diagnostic Markers 


A comprehensive evaluation includes an assessment of intellectual capacity and adaptive 
functioning; identification of genetic and nongenetic etiologies; evaluation for associated 
medical conditions (e.g., cerebral palsy, seizure disorder); and evaluation for co-occurring 
mental, emotional, and behavioral disorders. Components of the evaluation may include 
basic pre- and perinatal medical history, three-generational family pedigree, physical exam- 
ination, genetic evaluation (e.g., karyotype or chromosomal microarray analysis and testing 
for specific genetic syndromes), and metabolic screening and neuroimaging assessment. 


Differential Diagnosis 


The diagnosis of intellectual disability should be made whenever Criteria A, B, and C are 
met. A diagnosis of intellectual disability should not be assumed because of a particular 


40 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


genetic or medical condition. A genetic syndrome linked to intellectual disability should 
be noted as a concurrent diagnosis with the intellectual disability. 


Major and mild neurocognitive disorders. Intellectual disability is categorized as a neu- 
rodevelopmental disorder and is distinct from the neurocognitive disorders, which are 
characterized by a loss of cognitive functioning. Major neurocognitive disorder may co- 
occur with intellectual disability (e.g., an individual with Down syndrome who develops 
Alzheimer’s disease, or an individual with intellectual disability who loses further cogni- 
tive capacity following a head injury). In such cases, the diagnoses of intellectual disability 
and neurocognitive disorder may both be given. 


Communication disorders and specific learning disorder. These neurodevelopmental 
disorders are specific to the communication and learning domains and do not show defi- 
cits in intellectual and adaptive behavior. They may co-occur with intellectual disability. 
Both diagnoses are made if full criteria are met for intellectual disability and a communi- 
cation disorder or specific learning disorder. 


Autism spectrum disorder. Intellectual disability is common among individuals with 
autism spectrum disorder. Assessment of intellectual ability may be complicated by so- 
cial-communication and behavior deficits inherent to autism spectrum disorder, which 
may interfere with understanding and complying with test procedures. Appropriate as- 
sessment of intellectual functioning in autism spectrum disorder is essential, with reas- 
sessment across the developmental period, because IQ scores in autism spectrum disorder 
may be unstable, particularly in early childhood. 


Comorbidity 


Co-occurring mental, neurodevelopmental, medical, and physical conditions are frequent 
in intellectual disability, with rates of some conditions (e.g., mental disorders, cerebral 
palsy, and epilepsy) three to four times higher than in the general population. The prognosis 
and outcome of co-occurring diagnoses may be influenced by the presence of intellectual 
disability. Assessment procedures may require modifications because of associated disor- 
ders, including communication disorders, autism spectrum disorder, and motor, sensory, 
or other disorders. Knowledgeable informants are essential for identifying symptoms 
such as irritability, mood dysregulation, aggression, eating problems, and sleep problems, 
and for assessing adaptive functioning in various community settings. 

The most common co-occurring mental and neurodevelopmental disorders are atten- 
tion-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; depressive and bipolar disorders; anxiety disorders; 
autism spectrum disorder; stereotypic movement disorder (with or without self-injurious 
behavior); impulse-control disorders; and major neurocognitive disorder. Major depres- 
sive disorder may occur throughout the range of severity of intellectual disability. Self- 
injurious behavior requires prompt diagnostic attention and may warrant a separate di- 
agnosis of stereotypic movement disorder. Individuals with intellectual disability, partic- 
ularly those with more severe intellectual disability, may also exhibit aggression and 
disruptive behaviors, including harm of others or property destruction. 


Relationship to Other Classifications 


ICD-11 (in development at the time of this publication) uses the term intellectual develop- 
mental disorders to indicate that these are disorders that involve impaired brain functioning 
early in life. These disorders are described in ICD-11 as a metasyndrome occurring in the 
developmental period analogous to dementia or neurocognitive disorder in later life. 
There are four subtypes in ICD-11: mild, moderate, severe, and profound. 

The American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (AAIDD) 
also uses the term intellectual disability with a similar meaning to the term as used in this 


Global Developmental Delay 41 


manual. The AAIDD’s classification is multidimensional rather than categorical and is 
based on the disability construct. Rather than listing specifiers as is done in DSM-5, the 
AAIDD emphasizes a profile of supports based on severity. 


Global Developmental Delay 
315.8 (F88) 


This diagnosis is reserved for individuals under the age of 5 years when the clinical severity 
level cannot be reliably assessed during early childhood. This category is diagnosed when 
an individual fails to meet expected developmental milestones in several areas of intellec- 
tual functioning, and applies to individuals who are unable to undergo systematic assess- 
ments of intellectual functioning, including children who are too young to participate in 
standardized testing. This category requires reassessment after a period of time. 


Unspecified Intellectual Disability 
(Intellectual Developmental Disorder) 


319 (F79) 


This category is reserved for individuals over the age of 5 years when assessment of the 
degree of intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) by means of locally 
available procedures is rendered difficult or impossible because of associated sensory or 
physical impairments, as in blindness or prelingual deafness; locomotor disability; or pres- 
ence of severe problem behaviors or co-occurring mental disorder. This category should 
only be used in exceptional circumstances and requires reassessment after a period of time. 


Communication Disorders 


Disorders of communication include deficits in language, speech, and communication. 
Speech is the expressive production of sounds and includes an individual’s articulation, 
fluency, voice, and resonance quality. Language includes the form, function, and use of a 
conventional system of symbols (i.e., spoken words, sign language, written words, pic- 
tures) in a rule-governed manner for communication. Communication includes any verbal 
or nonverbal behavior (whether intentional or unintentional) that influences the behavior, 
ideas, or attitudes of another individual. Assessments of speech, language and communi- 
cation abilities must take into account the individual's cultural and language context, 
particularly for individuals growing up in bilingual environments. The standardized mea- 
sures of language development and of nonverbal intellectual capacity must be relevant for 
the cultural and linguistic group (i.e., tests developed and standardized for one group may 
not provide appropriate norms for a different group). The diagnostic category of commu- 
nication disorders includes the following: language disorder, speech sound disorder, 
childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering), social (pragmatic) communication disor- 
der, and other specified and unspecified communication disorders. 


42 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


Language Disorder 
Diagnostic Criteria 315.32 (F80.2) 


A. Persistent difficulties in the acquisition and use of language across modalities (i.e., 
spoken, written, sign language, or other) due to deficits in comprehension or produc- 
tion that include the following: 


1. Reduced vocabulary (word knowledge and use). 

2. Limited sentence structure (ability to put words and word endings together to form 
sentences based on the rules of grammar and morphology). 

3. Impairments in discourse (ability to use vocabulary and connect sentences to ex- 
plain or describe a topic or series of events or have a conversation). 


B. Language abilities are substantially and quantifiably below those expected for age, re- 
sulting in functional limitations in effective communication, social participation, aca- 
demic achievement, or occupational performance, individually or in any combination. 

C. Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period. 

D. The difficulties are not attributable to hearing or other sensory impairment, motor dys- 
function, or another medical or neurological condition and are not better explained by in- 
tellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) or global developmental delay. 


Diagnostic Features 


The core diagnostic features of language disorder are difficulties in the acquisition and use 
of language due to deficits in the comprehension or production of vocabulary, sentence 
structure, and discourse. The language deficits are evident in spoken communication, 
written communication, or sign language. Language learning and use is dependent on 
both receptive and expressive skills. Expressive ability refers to the production of vocal, ges- 
tural, or verbal signals, while receptive ability refers to the process of receiving and com- 
prehending language messages. Language skills need to be assessed in both expressive 
and receptive modalities as these may differ in severity. For example, an individual's ex- 
pressive language may be severely impaired, while his receptive language is hardly im- 
paired at all. 

Language disorder usually affects vocabulary and grammar, and these effects then 
limit the capacity for discourse. The child’s first words and phrases are likely to be delayed 
in onset; vocabulary size is smaller and less varied than expected; and sentences are 
shorter and less complex with grammatical errors, especially in past tense. Deficits in com- 
prehension of language are frequently underestimated, as children may be good at using 
context to infer meaning. There may be word-finding problems, impoverished verbal def- 
initions, or poor understanding of synonyms, multiple meanings, or word play appro- 
priate for age and culture. Problems with remembering new words and sentences are 
manifested by difficulties following instructions of increasing length, difficulties rehears- 
ing strings of verbal information (e.g., remembering a phone number or a shopping list), 
and difficulties remembering novel sound sequences, a skill that may be important for 
learning new words. Difficulties with discourse are shown by a reduced ability to provide 
adequate information about the key events and to narrate a coherent story. 

The language difficulty is manifest by abilities substantially and quantifiably below 
that expected for age and significantly interfering with academic achievement, occupa- 
tional performance, effective communication, or socialization (Criterion B). A diagnosis of 
language disorder is made based on the synthesis of the individual’s history, direct clinical 
observation in different contexts (i.e., home, school, or work), and scores from standard- 
ized tests of language ability that can be used to guide estimates of severity. 


Language Disorder 43 


Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 


A positive family history of language disorders is often present. Individuals, even chil- 
dren, can be adept at accommodating to their limited language. They may appear to be shy 
or reticent to talk. Affected individuals may prefer to communicate only with family mem- 
bers or other familiar individuals. Although these social indicators are not diagnostic of a 
language disorder, if they are notable and persistent, they warrant referral for a full lan- 
guage assessment. Language disorder, particularly expressive deficits, may co-occur with 
speech sound disorder. 


Development and Course 


Language acquisition is marked by changes from onset in toddlerhood to the adult level of 
competency that appears during adolescence. Changes appear across the dimensions of 
language (sounds, words, grammar, narratives/expository texts, and conversational 
skills) in age-graded increments and synchronies. Language disorder emerges during the 
early developmental period; however, there is considerable variation in early vocabulary 
acquisition and early word combinations, and individual differences are not, as single 
indicators, highly predictive of later outcomes. By age 4 years, individual differences in 
language ability are more stable, with better measurement accuracy, and are highly pre- 
dictive of later outcomes. Language disorder diagnosed from 4 years of age is likely to be 
stable over time and typically persists into adulthood, although the particular profile of 
language strengths and deficits is likely to change over the course of development. 


Risk and Prognostic Factors 


Children with receptive language impairments have a poorer prognosis than those with 
predominantly expressive impairments. They are more resistant to treatment, and diffi- 
culties with reading comprehension are frequently seen. 


Genetic and physiological. Language disorders are highly heritable, and family mem- 
bers are more likely to have a history of language impairment. 


Differential Diagnosis 


Normal variations in language. Language disorder needs to be distinguished from nor- 
mal developmental variations, and this distinction may be difficult to make before 4 years 
of age. Regional, social, or cultural/ethnic variations of language (e.g., dialects) must be 
considered when an individual is being assessed for language impairment. 


Hearing or other sensory impairment. Hearing impairment needs to be excluded as the 
primary cause of language difficulties. Language deficits may be associated with a hearing 
impairment, other sensory deficit, or a speech-motor deficit. When language deficits are in 
excess of those usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of language disorder 
may be made. 


Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder). Language delay is often the 
presenting feature of intellectual disability, and the definitive diagnosis may not be made 
until the child is able to complete standardized assessments. A separate diagnosis is not 
given unless the language deficits are clearly in excess of the intellectual limitations. 


Neurological disorders. Language disorder can be acquired in association with neuro- 
logical disorders, including epilepsy (e.g., acquired aphasia or Landau-Kleffner syndrome). 


Language regression. Loss of speech and language ina child younger than 3 years may 
bea sign of autism spectrum disorder (with developmental regression) or a specific neuro- 
logical condition, such as Landau-Kleffner syndrome. Among children older than 3 years, 
language loss may be a symptom of seizures, and a diagnostic assessment is necessary to 
exclude the presence of epilepsy (e.g., routine and sleep electroencephalogram). 


44 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


Comorbidity 


Language disorder is strongly associated with other neurodevelopmental disorders in 
terms of specific learning disorder (literacy and numeracy), attention-deficit/hyperactiv- 
ity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, and developmental coordination disorder. It is 
also associated with social (pragmatic) communication disorder. A positive family history 
of speech or language disorders is often present. 


Speech Sound Disorder 
Diagnostic Criteria 315.39 (F80.0) 


A. Persistent difficulty with speech sound production that interferes with speech intelligi- 
bility or prevents verbal communication of messages. 

B. The disturbance causes limitations in effective communication that interfere with social 
participation, academic achievement, or occupational performance, individually or in 
any combination. 

C. Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period. 

D. The difficulties are not attributable to congenital or acquired conditions, such as cere- 
bral palsy, cleft palate, deafness or hearing loss, traumatic brain injury, or other medi- 
cal or neurological conditions. 


Diagnostic Features 


Speech sound production describes the clear articulation of the phonemes (i.e., individual 
sounds) that in combination make up spoken words. Speech sound production requires both 
the phonological knowledge of speech sounds and the ability to coordinate the movements of 
the articulators (ie., the jaw, tongue, and lips,) with breathing and vocalizing for speech. Chil- 
dren with speech production difficulties may experience difficulty with phonological knowl- 
edge of speech sounds or the ability to coordinate movements for speech in varying degrees. 
Speech sound disorder is thus heterogeneous in its underlying mechanisms and includes pho- 
nological disorder and articulation disorder. A speech sound disorder is diagnosed when 
speech sound production is not what would be expected based on the child’s age and devel- 
opmental stage and when the deficits are not the result of a physical, structural, neurological, 
or hearing impairment. Among typically developing children at age 4 years, overall speech 
should be intelligible, whereas at age 2 years, only 50% may be understandable. 


Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 


Language disorder, particularly expressive deficits, may be found to co-occur with speech 
sound disorder. A positive family history of speech or language disorders is often present. 

If the ability to rapidly coordinate the articulators is a particular aspect of difficulty, 
there may be a history of delay or incoordination in acquiring skills that also utilize the 
articulators and related facial musculature; among others, these skills include chewing, 
maintaining mouth closure, and blowing the nose. Other areas of motor coordination may 
be impaired as in developmental coordination disorder. Verbal dyspraxia is a term also 
used for speech production problems. 

Speech may be differentially impaired in certain genetic conditions (e.g., Down syn- 
drome, 22q deletion, FoxP2 gene mutation). If present, these should also be coded. 


Development and Course 


Learning to produce speech sounds clearly and accurately and learning to produce con- 
nected speech fluently are developmental skills. Articulation of speech sounds follows a 


Childhood-Onset Fluency Disorder (Stuttering) 45 


developmental pattern, which is reflected in the age norms of standardized tests. It is not 
unusual for typically developing children to use developmental processes for shortening 
words and syllables as they are learning to talk, but their progression in mastering speech 
sound production should result in mostly intelligible speech by age 3 years. Children with 
speech sound disorder continue to use immature phonological simplification processes 
past the age when most children can produce words clearly. 

Most speech sounds should be produced clearly and most words should be pronounced 
accurately according to age and community norms by age 7 years. The most frequently mis- 
articulated sounds also tend to be learned later, leading them to be called the “late eight” (1, r, 
s, Z, th, ch, dzh, and zh). Misarticulation of any of these sounds by itself could be considered 
within normal limits up to age 8 years. When multiple sounds are involved, it may be appro- 
priate to target some of those sounds as part of a plan to improve intelligibility prior to the age 
at which almost all children can produce them accurately. Lisping (i.e., misarticulating sibi- 
lants) is particularly common and may involve frontal or lateral patterns of airstream direc- 
tion. It may be associated with an abnormal tongue-thrust swallowing pattern. 

Most children with speech sound disorder respond well to treatment, and speech dif- 
ficulties improve over time, and thus the disorder may not be lifelong. However, when a 
language disorder is also present, the speech disorder has a poorer prognosis and may be 
associated with specific learning disorders. 


Differential Diagnosis 


Normal variations in speech. Regional, social, or cultural/ethnic variations of speech 
should be considered before making the diagnosis. 


Hearing or other sensory impairment. Hearing impairment or deafness may result in 
abnormalities of speech. Deficits of speech sound production may be associated with a 
hearing impairment, other sensory deficit, or a speech-motor deficit. When speech deficits 
are in excess of those usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of speech sound 
disorder may be made. 


Structural deficits. Speech impairment may be due to structural deficits (e.g., cleft palate). 


Dysarthria. Speech impairment may be attributable to a motor disorder, such as cerebral 
palsy. Neurological signs, as well as distinctive features of voice, differentiate dysarthria 
from speech sound disorder, although in young children (under 3 years) differentiation 
may be difficult, particularly when there is no or minimal general body motor involve- 
ment (as in, e.g., Worster-Drought syndrome). 


Selective mutism. Limited use of speech may be a sign of selective mutism, an anxiety 
disorder that is characterized by a lack of speech in one or more contexts or settings. Se- 
lective mutism may develop in children with a speech disorder because of embarassment 
about their impairments, but many children with selective mutism exhibit normal speech 
in “safe” settings, such as at home or with close friends. 


Childhood-Onset Fluency Disorder (Stuttering) 
Diagnostic Criteria 315.35 (F80.81) 


A. Disturbances in the normal fluency and time patterning of speech that are inappropri- 
ate for the individual’s age and language skills, persist over time, and are characterized 
by frequent and marked occurrences of one (or more) of the following: 

1. Sound and syllable repetitions. 
2. Sound prolongations of consonants as well as vowels. 


46 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


Broken words (e.g., pauses within a word). 

Audible or silent blocking (filled or unfilled pauses in speech). 
Circumlocutions (word substitutions to avoid problematic words). 
Words produced with an excess of physical tension. 
Monosyllabic whole-word repetitions (e.g., “I-I-l-l see him”). 


Noo w 


B. The disturbance causes anxiety about speaking or limitations in effective communica- 
tion, social participation, or academic or occupational performance, individually or in 
any combination. 

C. The onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period. (Note: Later-onset cases 
are diagnosed as 307.0 [F98.5] adult-onset fluency disorder.) 

D. The disturbance is not attributable to a speech-motor or sensory deficit, dysfluency as- 
sociated with neurological insult (e.g., stroke, tumor, trauma), or another medical con- 
dition and is not better explained by another mental disorder. 


Diagnostic Features 


The essential feature of childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering) is a disturbance in 
the normal fluency and time patterning of speech that is inappropriate for the individual’s 
age. This disturbance is characterized by frequent repetitions or prolongations of sounds 
or syllables and by other types of speech dysfluencies, including broken words (e.g., 
pauses within a word), audible or silent blocking (i.e., filled or unfilled pauses in speech), 
circumlocutions (i-e., word substitutions to avoid problematic words), words produced 
with an excess of physical tension, and monosyllabic whole-word repetitions (e.g., “I-I-I-I 
see him”). The disturbance in fluency interferes with academic or occupational achieve- 
ment or with social communication. The extent of the disturbance varies from situation to 
situation and often is more severe when there is special pressure to communicate (e.g., giv- 
ing a report at school, interviewing for a job). Dysfluency is often absent during oral read- 
ing, singing, or talking to inanimate objects or to pets. 


Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 


Fearful anticipation of the problem may develop. The speaker may attempt to avoid dys- 
fluencies by linguistic mechanisms (e.g., altering the rate of speech, avoiding certain 
words or sounds) or by avoiding certain speech situations, such as telephoning or public 
speaking. In addition to being features of the condition, stress and anxiety have been 
shown to exacerbate dysfluency. 

Childhood-onset fluency disorder may also be accompanied by motor movements 
(e.g., eye blinks, tics, tremors of the lips or face, jerking of the head, breathing movements, 
fist clenching). Children with fluency disorder show a range of language abilities, and the 
relationship between fluency disorder and language abilities is unclear. 


Development and Course 


Childhood-onset fluency disorder, or developmental stuttering, occurs by age 6 for 80%- 
90% of affected individuals, with age at onset ranging from 2 to 7 years. The onset can be 
insidious or more sudden. Typically, dysfluencies start gradually, with repetition of initial 
consonants, first words of a phrase, or long words. The child may not be aware of dysflu- 
encies. As the disorder progresses, the dysfluencies become more frequent and interfering, 
occurring on the most meaningful words or phrases in the utterance. As the child becomes 
aware of the speech difficulty, he or she may develop mechanisms for avoiding the dys- 
fluencies and emotional responses, including avoidance of public speaking and use of 
short and simple utterances. Longitudinal research shows that 65%-85% of children re- 


Social (Pragmatic) Communication Disorder 47 


cover from the dysfluency, with severity of fluency disorder at age 8 years predicting re- 
covery or persistence into adolescence and beyond. 


Risk and Prognostic Factors 


Genetic and physiological. The risk of stuttering among first-degree biological rela- 
tives of individuals with childhood-onset fluency disorder is more than three times the 
risk in the general population. 


Functional Consequences of 
Childhood-Onset Fluency Disorder (Stuttering) 


In addition to being features of the condition, stress and anxiety can exacerbate dysflu- 
ency. Impairment of social functioning may result from this anxiety. 


Differential Diagnosis 


Sensory deficits. Dysfluencies of speech may be associated with a hearing impairment 
or other sensory deficit or a speech-motor deficit. When the speech dysfluencies are in ex- 
cess of those usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of childhood-onset flu- 
ency disorder may be made. 


Normal speech dysfluencies. The disorder must be distinguished from normal dysflu- 
encies that occur frequently in young children, which include whole-word or phrase rep- 
etitions (e.g., “I want, I want ice cream”), incomplete phrases, interjections, unfilled 
pauses, and parenthetical remarks. If these difficulties increase in frequency or complexity 
as the child grows older, a diagnosis of childhood-onset fluency disorder is appropriate. 


Medication side effects. Stuttering may occur as a side effect of medication and may be 
detected by a temporal relationship with exposure to the medication. 


Adult-onset dysfluencies. If onset of dysfluencies is during or after adolescence, it is an 
“adult-onset dysfluency” rather than a neurodevelopmental disorder. Adult-onset dysflu- 
encies are associated with specific neurological insults and a variety of medical conditions 
and mental disorders and may be specified with them, but they are nota DSM-5 diagnosis. 


Tourette’s disorder. Vocal tics and repetitive vocalizations of Tourette’s disorder 
should be distinguishable from the repetitive sounds of childhood-onset fluency disorder 
by their nature and timing. 


Social (Pragmatic) Communication Disorder 
Diagnostic Criteria 315.39 (F80.89) 


A. Persistent difficulties in the social use of verbal and nonverbal communication as man- 
ifested by all of the following: 


1. Deficits in using communication for social purposes, such as greeting and sharing 
information, in a manner that is appropriate for the social context. 

2. Impairment of the ability to change communication to match context or the needs of 
the listener, such as speaking differently in a classroom than on a playground, talk- 
ing differently to a child than to an adult, and avoiding use of overly formal language. 

3. Difficulties following rules for conversation and storytelling, such as taking turns in 
conversation, rephrasing when misunderstood, and knowing how to use verbal and 
nonverbal signals to regulate interaction. 


48 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


4. Difficulties understanding what is not explicitly stated (e.g., making inferences) and 
nonliteral or ambiguous meanings of language (e.g., idioms, humor, metaphors, 
multiple meanings that depend on the context for interpretation). 


B. The deficits result in functional limitations in effective communication, social participa- 
tion, social relationships, academic achievement, or occupational performance, indi- 
vidually or in combination. 

C. The onset of the symptoms is in the early developmental period (but deficits may not 
become fully manifest until social communication demands exceed limited capacities). 

D. The symptoms are not attributable to another medical or neurological condition or to low 
abilities in the domains of word structure and grammar, and are not better explained by 
autism spectrum disorder, intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder), 
global developmental delay, or another mental disorder. 


Diagnostic Features 


Social (pragmatic) communication disorder is characterized by a primary difficulty with 
pragmatics, or the social use of language and communication, as manifested by deficits in 
understanding and following social rules of verbal and nonverbal communication in nat- 
uralistic contexts, changing language according to the needs of the listener or situation, 
and following rules for conversations and storytelling. The deficits in social communica- 
tion result in functional limitations in effective communication, social participation, devel- 
opment of social relationships, academic achievement, or occupational performance. The 
deficits are not better explained by low abilities in the domains of structural language or 
cognitive ability. 


Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 


The most common associated feature of social (pragmatic) communication disorder is lan- 
guage impairment, which is characterized by a history of delay in reaching language mile- 
stones, and historical, if not current, structural language problems (see “Language Disorder” 
earlier in this chapter). Individuals with social communication deficits may avoid social inter- 
actions. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), behavioral problems, and specific 
learning disorders are also more common among affected individuals. 


Development and Course 


Because social (pragmatic) communication depends on adequate developmental progress 
in speech and language, diagnosis of social (pragmatic) communication disorder is rare 
among children younger than 4 years. By age 4 or 5 years, most children should possess 
adequate speech and language abilities to permit identification of specific deficits in social 
communication. Milder forms of the disorder may not become apparent until early ado- 
lescence, when language and social interactions become more complex. 

The outcome of social (pragmatic) communication disorder is variable, with some chil- 
dren improving substantially over time and others continuing to have difficulties persist- 
ing into adulthood. Even among those who have significant improvements, the early 
deficits in pragmatics may cause lasting impairments in social relationships and behavior 
and also in acquisition of other related skills, such as written expression. 


Risk and Prognostic Factors 


Genetic and physiological. A family history of autism spectrum disorder, communica- 
tion disorders, or specific learning disorder appears to increase the risk for social (prag- 
matic) communication disorder. 


Unspecified Communication Disorder 49 


Differential Diagnosis 


Autism spectrum disorder. Autism spectrum disorder is the primary diagnostic con- 
sideration for individuals presenting with social communication deficits. The two disor- 
ders can be differentiated by the presence in autism spectrum disorder of restricted/ 
repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities and their absence in social (prag- 
matic) communication disorder. Individuals with autism spectrum disorder may only dis- 
play the restricted /repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, and activities during the early 
developmental period, so a comprehensive history should be obtained. Current absence of 
symptoms would not preclude a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder, if the restricted 
interests and repetitive behaviors were present in the past. A diagnosis of social (prag- 
matic) communication disorder should be considered only if the developmental history 
fails to reveal any evidence of restricted/repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or ac- 
tivities. 

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Primary deficits of ADHD may cause impair- 
ments in social communication and functional limitations of effective communication, so- 
cial participation, or academic achievement. 


Social anxiety disorder (social phobia). The symptoms of social communication disor- 
der overlap with those of social anxiety disorder. The differentiating feature is the timing 
of the onset of symptoms. In social (pragmatic) communication disorder, the individual 
has never had effective social communication; in social anxiety disorder, the social com- 
munication skills developed appropriately but are not utilized because of anxiety, fear, or 
distress about social interactions. 


Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) and global developmental 
delay. Social communication skills may be deficient among individuals with global de- 
velopmental delay or intellectual disability, but a separate diagnosis is not given unless 
the social communication deficits are clearly in excess of the intellectual limitations. 


Unspecified Communication Disorder 
307.9 (F80.9) 


This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of communication 
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or 
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for com- 
munication disorder or for any of the disorders in the neurodevelopmental disorders diag- 
nostic class. The unspecified communication disorder category is used in situations in 
which the clinician chooses not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for com- 
munication disorder or for a specific neurodevelopmental disorder, and includes presen- 
tations in which there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis. 


50 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


Autism Spectrum Disorder 


Autism Spectrum Disorder 
Diagnostic Criteria 299.00 (F84.0) 


A. Persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction across multiple con- 
texts, as manifested by the following, currently or by history (examples are illustrative, 
not exhaustive; see text): 


1. Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity, ranging, for example, from abnormal social 
approach and failure of normal back-and-forth conversation; to reduced sharing of 
interests, emotions, or affect; to failure to initiate or respond to social interactions. 

2. Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction, ranging, 
for example, from poorly integrated verbal and nonverbal communication; to abnor- 
malities in eye contact and body language or deficits in understanding and use of 
gestures; to a total lack of facial expressions and nonverbal communication. 

3. Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships, ranging, for ex- 
ample, from difficulties adjusting behavior to suit various social contexts; to difficulties 
in sharing imaginative play or in making friends; to absence of interest in peers. 


Specify current severity: 
Severity is based on social communication impairments and restricted, re- 
petitive patterns of behavior (seeTable 2). 


B. Restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities, as manifested by at 
least two of the following, currently or by history (examples are illustrative, not exhaus- 
tive; see text): 


1. Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or speech (e.g., simple 
motor stereotypies, lining up toys or flipping objects, echolalia, idiosyncratic 
phrases). 

2. Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or ritualized patterns of 
verbal or nonverbal behavior (e.g., extreme distress at small changes, difficulties 
with transitions, rigid thinking patterns, greeting rituals, need to take same route or 
eat same food every day). 

3. Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g., 
strong attachment to or preoccupation with unusual objects, excessively circum- 
scribed or perseverative interests). 

4. Hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in sensory aspects of 
the environment (e.g., apparent indifference to pain/temperature, adverse re- 
sponse to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects, 
visual fascination with lights or movement). 

Specify current severity: 

Severity is based on social communication impairments and restricted, re- 
petitive patterns of behavior (see Table 2). 

C. Symptoms must be present in the early developmental period (but may not become 
fully manifest until social demands exceed limited capacities, or may be masked by 
learned strategies in later life). 

D. Symptoms cause clinically significant impairment in social, occupational, or other im- 
portant areas of current functioning. 


Autism Spectrum Disorder 51 


E. These disturbances are not better explained by intellectual disability (intellectual devel- 
opmental disorder) or global developmental delay. Intellectual disability and autism 
spectrum disorder frequently co-occur; to make comorbid diagnoses of autism spec- 
trum disorder and intellectual disability, social communication should be below that ex- 
pected for general developmental level. 


Note: Individuals with a well-established DSM-IV diagnosis of autistic disorder, Asperger’s 
disorder, or pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified should be given the 
diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. Individuals who have marked deficits in social 
communication, but whose symptoms do not otherwise meet criteria for autism spectrum 
disorder, should be evaluated for social (pragmatic) communication disorder. 
Specify if: 
With or without accompanying intellectual impairment 
With or without accompanying language impairment 
Associated with a known medical or genetic condition or environmental factor 
(Coding note: Use additional code to identify the associated medical or genetic condition.) 
Associated with another neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral disorder 
(Coding note: Use additional code[s] to identify the associated neurodevelopmental, 
mental, or behavioral disorder{s].) 
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental dis- 
order, pp. 119-120, for definition) (Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 [F06.1] 
catatonia associated with autism spectrum disorder to indicate the presence of the co- 
morbid catatonia.) 


Recording Procedures 


For autism spectrum disorder that is associated with a known medical or genetic condition 
or environmental factor, or with another neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral dis- 
order, record autism spectrum disorder associated with (name of condition, disorder, or 
factor) (e.g., autism spectrum disorder associated with Rett syndrome). Severity should be 
recorded as level of support needed for each of the two psychopathological domains in 
Table 2 (e.g., “requiring very substantial support for deficits in social communication and 
requiring substantial support for restricted, repetitive behaviors”). Specification of “with 
accompanying intellectual impairment” or “without accompanying intellectual impair- 
ment” should be recorded next. Language impairment specification should be recorded 
thereafter. If there is accompanying language impairment, the current level of verbal func- 
tioning should be recorded (e.g., “with accompanying language impairment—no intelligi- 
ble speech” or “with accompanying language impairment—phrase speech”). If catatonia is 
present, record separately “catatonia associated with autism spectrum disorder.” 


Specifiers 
The severity specifiers (see Table 2) may be used to describe succinctly the current symp- 
tomatology (which might fall below level 1), with the recognition that severity may vary by 
context and fluctuate over time. Severity of social communication difficulties and re- 
stricted, repetitive behaviors should be separately rated. The descriptive severity categories 
should not be used to determine eligibility for and provision of services; these can only be 
developed at an individual level and through discussion of personal priorities and targets. 
Regarding the specifier “with or without accompanying intellectual impairment,” un- 
derstanding the (often uneven) intellectual profile of a child or adult with autism spectrum 
disorder is necessary for interpreting diagnostic features. Separate estimates of verbal and 
nonverbal skill are necessary (e.g., using untimed nonverbal tests to assess potential 
strengths in individuals with limited language). 


TABLE 2 Severity levels for autism spectrum disorder 


Severity level 


Level 3 
“Requiring very substantial support” 


Level 2 
“Requiring substantial support” 


Level 1 
“Requiring support” 


Social communication 


Severe deficits in verbal and nonverbal social com- 
munication skills cause severe impairments in func- 
tioning, very limited initiation of social 
interactions, and minimal response to social over- 
tures from others. For example, a person with few 
words of intelligible speech who rarely initiates 
interaction and, when he or she does, makes 
unusual approaches to meet needs only and 
responds to only very direct social approaches. 


Marked deficits in verbal and nonverbal social com- 
munication skills; social impairments apparent 
even with supports in place; limited initiation of 
social interactions; and reduced or abnormal 
responses to social overtures from others. For 
example, a person who speaks simple sentences, 
whose interaction is limited to narrow special inter- 
ests, and who has markedly odd nonverbal com- 
munication. 


Without supports in place, deficits in social communi- 
cation cause noticeable impairments. 
Difficulty initiating social interactions, and clear 
examples of atypical or unsuccessful responses to 
social overtures of others. May appear to have 
decreased interest in social interactions. For example, 
a person who is able to speak in full sentences and 
engages in communication but whose to-and-fro con- 
versation with others fails, and whose attempts to 
make friends are odd and typically unsuccessful. 


Restricted, repetitive behaviors 


Inflexibility of behavior, extreme difficulty coping 
with change, or other restricted /repetitive behav- 
iors markedly interfere with functioning in all 
spheres. Great distress/difficulty changing focus 
or action. 


Inflexibility of behavior, difficulty coping with 
change, or other restricted /repetitive behaviors 
appear frequently enough to be obvious to the 
casual observer and interfere with functioning 
in a variety of contexts. Distress and/or difficulty 
changing focus or action. 


Inflexibility of behavior causes significant interfer- 
ence with functioning in one or more contexts. Dif- 
ficulty switching between activities. Problems of 
organization and planning hamper independence. 


es 


sJepsosiq je]uswdojeAeposneNn 


Autism Spectrum Disorder 53 


To use the specifier “with or without accompanying language impairment,” the cur- 
rent level of verbal functioning should be assessed and described. Examples of the specific 
descriptions for “with accompanying language impairment” might include no intelligible 
speech (nonverbal), single words only, or phrase speech. Language level in individuals 
“without accompanying language impairment” might be further described by speaks in 
full sentences or has fluent speech. Since receptive language may lag behind expressive 
language development in autism spectrum disorder, receptive and expressive language 
skills should be considered separately. 

The specifier “associated with a known medical or genetic condition or environmental fac- 
tor” should be used when the individual has a known genetic disorder (e.g., Rett syndrome, 
Fragile X syndrome, Down syndrome), a medical disorder (e.g. epilepsy), or a history of envi- 
ronmental exposure (e.g., valproate, fetal alcohol syndrome, very low birth weight). 

Additional neurodevelopmental, mental or behavioral conditions should also be noted 
(e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; developmental coordination disorder; dis- 
ruptive behavior, impulse-control, or conduct disorders; anxiety, depressive, or bipolar 
disorders; tics or Tourette’s disorder; self-injury; feeding, elimination, or sleep disorders). 


Diagnostic Features 


The essential features of autism spectrum disorder are persistent impairment in reciprocal 
social communication and social interaction (Criterion A), and restricted, repetitive pat- 
terns of behavior, interests, or activities (Criterion B). These symptoms are present from 
early childhood and limit or impair everyday functioning (Criteria C and D). The stage at 
which functional impairment becomes obvious will vary according to characteristics of 
the individual and his or her environment. Core diagnostic features are evident in the 
developmental period, but intervention, compensation, and current supports may mask 
difficulties in at least some contexts. Manifestations of the disorder also vary greatly de- 
pending on the severity of the autistic condition, developmental level, and chronological age; 
hence, the term spectrum. Autism spectrum disorder encompasses disorders previously re- 
ferred to as early infantile autism, childhood autism, Kanner’s autism, high-functioning 
autism, atypical autism, pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified, child- 
hood disintegrative disorder, and Asperger’s disorder. 

The impairments in communication and social interaction specified in Criterion A are 
pervasive and sustained. Diagnoses are most valid and reliable when based on multiple 
sources of information, including clinician’s observations, caregiver history, and, when 
possible, self-report. Verbal and nonverbal deficits in social communication have varying 
manifestations, depending on the individual's age, intellectual level, and language ability, 
as well as other factors such as treatment history and current support. Many individuals 
have language deficits, ranging from complete lack of speech through language delays, 
poor comprehension of speech, echoed speech, or stilted and overly literal language. Even 
when formal language skills (e.g., vocabulary, grammar) are intact, the use of language for 
reciprocal social communication is impaired in autism spectrum disorder. 

Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity (i.e., the ability to engage with others and share 
thoughts and feelings) are clearly evident in young children with the disorder, who may 
show little or no initiation of social interaction and no sharing of emotions, along with re- 
duced or absent imitation of others’ behavior. What language exists is often one-sided, 
lacking in social reciprocity, and used to request or label rather than to comment, share 
feelings, or converse. In adults without intellectual disabilities or language delays, deficits 
in social-emotional reciprocity may be most apparent in difficulties processing and re- 
sponding to complex social cues (e.g., when and how to join a conversation, what not to 
say). Adults who have developed compensation strategies for some social challenges still 
struggle in novel or unsupported situations and suffer from the effort and anxiety of con- 
sciously calculating what is socially intuitive for most individuals. 


54 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction are mani- 
fested by absent, reduced, or atypical use of eye contact (relative to cultural norms), ges- 
tures, facial expressions, body orientation, or speech intonation. An early feature of autism 
spectrum disorder is impaired joint attention as manifested by a lack of pointing, showing, 
or bringing objects to share interest with others, or failure to follow someone’s pointing or 
eye gaze. Individuals may learn a few functional gestures, but their repertoire is smaller 
than that of others, and they often fail to use expressive gestures spontaneously in com- 
munication. Among adults with fluent language, the difficulty in coordinating nonverbal 
communication with speech may give the impression of odd, wooden, or exaggerated 
“body language” during interactions. Impairment may be relatively subtle within indi- 
vidual modes (e.g., someone may have relatively good eye contact when speaking) but 
noticeable in poor integration of eye contact, gesture, body posture, prosody, and facial ex- 
pression for social communication. 

Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships should be 
judged against norms for age, gender, and culture. There may be absent, reduced, or atyp- 
ical social interest, manifested by rejection of others, passivity, or inappropriate ap- 
proaches that seem aggressive or disruptive. These difficulties are particularly evident in 
young children, in whom there is often a lack of shared social play and imagination (e.g., 
age-appropriate flexible pretend play) and, later, insistence on playing by very fixed rules. 
Older individuals may struggle to understand what behavior is considered appropriate in 
one situation but not another (e.g., casual behavior during a job interview), or the different 
ways that language may be used to communicate (e.g., irony, white lies). There may be an 
apparent preference for solitary activities or for interacting with much younger or older 
people. Frequently, there is a desire to establish friendships without a complete or realistic 
idea of what friendship entails (e.g., one-sided friendships or friendships based solely on 
shared special interests). Relationships with siblings, co-workers, and caregivers are also 
important to consider (in terms of reciprocity). 

Autism spectrum disorder is also defined by restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, 
interests, or activities (as specified in Criterion B), which show a range of manifestations 
according to age and ability, intervention, and current supports. Stereotyped or repetitive 
behaviors include simple motor stereotypies (e.g., hand flapping, finger flicking), repeti- 
tive use of objects (e.g., spinning coins, lining up toys), and repetitive speech (e.g., echola- 
lia, the delayed or immediate parroting of heard words; use of “you” when referring to 
self; stereotyped use of words, phrases, or prosodic patterns). Excessive adherence to rou- 
tines and restricted patterns of behavior may be manifest in resistance to change (e.g., dis- 
tress at apparently small changes, such as in packaging of a favorite food; insistence on 
adherence to rules; rigidity of thinking) or ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal be- 
havior (e.g., repetitive questioning, pacing a perimeter). Highly restricted, fixated interests 
in autism spectrum disorder tend to be abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g., a toddler 
strongly attached to a pan; a child preoccupied with vacuum cleaners; an adult spending 
hours writing out timetables). Some fascinations and routines may relate to apparent hy- 
per- or hyporeactivity to sensory input, manifested through extreme responses to specific 
sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects, fascination with lights or 
spinning objects, and sometimes apparent indifference to pain, heat, or cold. Extreme re- 
action to or rituals involving taste, smell, texture, or appearance of food or excessive food 
restrictions are common and may be a presenting feature of autism spectrum disorder. 

Many adults with autism spectrum disorder without intellectual or language disabili- 
ties learn to suppress repetitive behavior in public. Special interests may be a source of 
pleasure and motivation and provide avenues for education and employment later in life. 
Diagnostic criteria may be met when restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, 
or activities were clearly present during childhood or at some time in the past, even if 
symptoms are no longer present. 


Autism Spectrum Disorder 55 


Criterion D requires that the features must cause clinically significant impairment in so- 
cial, occupational, or other important areas of current functioning. Criterion E specifies that 
the social communication deficits, although sometimes accompanied by intellectual disabil- 
ity (intellectual developmental disorder), are not in line with the individual’s developmental 
level; impairments exceed difficulties expected on the basis of developmental level. 

Standardized behavioral diagnostic instruments with good psychometric properties, 
including caregiver interviews, questionnaires and clinician observation measures, are 
available and can improve reliability of diagnosis over time and across clinicians. 


Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 


Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder also have intellectual impairment and/or 
language impairment (e.g., slow to talk, language comprehension behind production). Even 
those with average or high intelligence have an uneven profile of abilities. The gap between 
intellectual and adaptive functional skills is often large. Motor deficits are often present, in- 
cluding odd gait, clumsiness, and other abnormal motor signs (e.g., walking on tiptoes). Self- 
injury (e.g., head banging, biting the wrist) may occur, and disruptive/challenging behav- 
iors are more common in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder than 
other disorders, including intellectual disability. Adolescents and adults with autism spec- 
trum disorder are prone to anxiety and depression. Some individuals develop catatonic-like 
motor behavior (slowing and “freezing” mid-action), but these are typically not of the mag- 
nitude of a catatonic episode. However, it is possible for individuals with autism spectrum 
disorder to experience a marked deterioration in motor symptoms and display a full cata- 
tonic episode with symptoms such as mutism, posturing, grimacing and waxy flexibility. 
The risk period for comorbid catatonia appears to be greatest in the adolescent years. 


Prevalence 


In recent years, reported frequencies for autism spectrum disorder across U.S. and non- 
U.S. countries have approached 1% of the population, with similar estimates in child and 
adult samples. It remains unclear whether higher rates reflect an expansion of the diag- 
nostic criteria of DSM-IV to include subthreshold cases, increased awareness, differences 
in study methodology, or a true increase in the frequency of autism spectrum disorder. 


Development and Course 


The age and pattern of onset also should be noted for autism spectrum disorder. Symptoms 
are typically recognized during the second year of life (12-24 months of age) but may be seen 
earlier than 12 months if developmental delays are severe, or noted later than 24 months if 
symptoms are more subtle. The pattern of onset description might include information 
about early developmental delays or any losses of social or language skills. In cases where 
skills have been lost, parents or caregivers may give a history of a gradual or relatively 
rapid deterioration in social behaviors or language skills. Typically, this would occur be- 
tween 12 and 24 months of age and is distinguished from the rare instances of developmen- 
tal regression occurring after at least 2 years of normal development (previously described 
as childhood disintegrative disorder). 

The behavioral features of autism spectrum disorder first become evident in early 
childhood, with some cases presenting a lack of interest in social interaction in the first 
year of life. Some children with autism spectrum disorder experience developmental pla- 
teaus or regression, with a gradual or relatively rapid deterioration in social behaviors or 
use of language, often during the first 2 years of life. Such losses are rare in other disor- 
ders and may be a useful “red flag” for autism spectrum disorder. Much more unusual 
and warranting more extensive medical investigation are losses of skills beyond social 
communication (e.g., loss of self-care, toileting, motor skills) or those occurring after the 


56 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


second birthday (see also Rett syndrome in the section “Differential Diagnosis” for this 
disorder). 

First symptoms of autism spectrum disorder frequently involve delayed language de- 
velopment, often accompanied by lack of social interest or unusual social interactions (e.g., 
pulling individuals by the hand without any attempt to look at them), odd play patterns 
(e.g., carrying toys around but never playing with them), and unusual communication 
patterns (e.g., knowing the alphabet but not responding to own name). Deafness may be 
suspected but is typically ruled out. During the second year, odd and repetitive behaviors 
and the absence of typical play become more apparent. Since many typically developing 
young children have strong preferences and enjoy repetition (e.g., eating the same foods, 
watching the same video multiple times), distinguishing restricted and repetitive behav- 
iors that are diagnostic of autism spectrum disorder can be difficult in preschoolers. The 
clinical distinction is based on the type, frequency, and intensity of the behavior (e.g., a 
child who daily lines up objects for hours and is very distressed if any item is moved). 

Autism spectrum disorder is not a degenerative disorder, and it is typical for learning 
and compensation to continue throughout life. Symptoms are often most marked in early 
childhood and early school years, with developmental gains typical in later childhood in 
at least some areas (e.g., increased interest in social interaction). A small proportion of in- 
dividuals deteriorate behaviorally during adolescence, whereas most others improve. 
Only a minority of individuals with autism spectrum disorder live and work indepen- 
dently in adulthood; those who do tend to have superior language and intellectual abilities 
and are able to find a niche that matches their special interests and skills. In general, indi- 
viduals with lower levels of impairment may be better able to function independently. 
However, even these individuals may remain socially naive and vulnerable, have difficul- 
ties organizing practical demands without aid, and are prone to anxiety and depression. 
Many adults report using compensation strategies and coping mechanisms to mask their 
difficulties in public but suffer from the stress and effort of maintaining a socially accept- 
able facade. Scarcely anything is known about old age in autism spectrum disorder. 

Some individuals come for first diagnosis in adulthood, perhaps prompted by the diagno- 
sis of autism ina child in the family or a breakdown of relations at work or home. Obtaining de- 
tailed developmental history in such cases may be difficult, and it is important to consider self- 
reported difficulties. Where clinical observation suggests criteria are currently met, autism 
spectrum disorder may be diagnosed, provided there is no evidence of good social and com- 
munication skills in childhood. For example, the report (by parents or another relative) that the 
individual had ordinary and sustained reciprocal friendships and good nonverbal communi- 
cation skills throughout childhood would rule out a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder; 
however, the absence of developmental information in itself should not do so. 

Manifestations of the social and communication impairments and restricted/repeti- 
tive behaviors that define autism spectrum disorder are clear in the developmental period. 
In later life, intervention or compensation, as well as current supports, may mask these dif- 
ficulties in at least some contexts. However, symptoms remain sufficient to cause current 
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. 


Risk and Prognostic Factors 


The best established prognostic factors for individual outcome within autism spectrum 
disorder are presence or absence of associated intellectual disability and language impair- 
ment (e.g., functional language by age 5 years is a good prognostic sign) and additional 
mental health problems. Epilepsy, as a comorbid diagnosis, is associated with greater in- 
tellectual disability and lower verbal ability. 


Environmental. A variety of nonspecific risk factors, such as advanced parental age, low 
birth weight, or fetal exposure to valproate, may contribute to risk of autism spectrum dis- 
order. 


Autism Spectrum Disorder 57 


Genetic and physiological. Heritability estimates for autism spectrum disorder have 
ranged from 37% to higher than 90%, based on twin concordance rates. Currently, as many 
as 15% of cases of autism spectrum disorder appear to be associated with a known genetic 
mutation, with different de novo copy number variants or de novo mutations in specific 
genes associated with the disorder in different families. However, even when an autism 
spectrum disorder is associated with a known genetic mutation, it does not appear to be 
fully penetrant. Risk for the remainder of cases appears to be polygenic, with perhaps hun- 
dreds of genetic loci making relatively small contributions. 


Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 


Cultural differences will exist in norms for social interaction, nonverbal communication, 
and relationships, but individuals with autism spectrum disorder are markedly impaired 
against the norms for their cultural context. Cultural and socioeconomic factors may affect 
age at recognition or diagnosis; for example, in the United States, late or underdiagnosis of 
autism spectrum disorder among African American children may occur. 


Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues 


Autism spectrum disorder is diagnosed four times more often in males than in females. In 
clinic samples, females tend to be more likely to show accompanying intellectual disabil- 
ity, suggesting that girls without accompanying intellectual impairments or language 
delays may go unrecognized, perhaps because of subtler manifestation of social and com- 
munication difficulties. 


Functional Consequences of Autism Spectrum Disorder 


In young children with autism spectrum disorder, lack of social and communication abil- 
ities may hamper learning, especially learning through social interaction or in settings 
with peers. In the home, insistence on routines and aversion to change, as well as sensory 
sensitivities, may interfere with eating and sleeping and make routine care (e.g., haircuts, 
dental work) extremely difficult. Adaptive skills are typically below measured IQ. Ex- 
treme difficulties in planning, organization, and coping with change negatively impact 
academic achievement, even for students with above-average intelligence. During adult- 
hood, these individuals may have difficulties establishing independence because of con- 
tinued rigidity and difficulty with novelty. 

Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder, even without intellectual disability, 
have poor adult psychosocial functioning as indexed by measures such as independent 
living and gainful employment. Functional consequences in old age are unknown, but so- 
cial isolation and communication problems (e.g., reduced help-seeking) are likely to have 
consequences for health in older adulthood. 


Differential Diagnosis 


Rett syndrome. Disruption of social interaction may be observed during the regressive 
phase of Rett syndrome (typically between 1-4 years of age); thus, a substantial proportion 
of affected young girls may have a presentation that meets diagnostic criteria for autism 
spectrum disorder. However, after this period, most individuals with Rett syndrome im- 
prove their social communication skills, and autistic features are no longer a major area of 
concern. Consequently, autism spectrum disorder should be considered only when all di- 
agnostic criteria are met. 


Selective mutism. In selective mutism, early development is not typically disturbed. 
The affected child usually exhibits appropriate communication skills in certain contexts 
and settings. Even in settings where the child is mute, social reciprocity is not impaired, 
nor are restricted or repetitive patterns of behavior present. 


58 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


Language disorders and social (pragmatic) communication disorder. In some forms 
of language disorder, there may be problems of communication and some secondary so- 
cial difficulties. However, specific language disorder is not usually associated with abnor- 
mal nonverbal communication, nor with the presence of restricted, repetitive patterns of 
behavior, interests, or activities. 

When an individual shows impairment in social communication and social interactions 
but does not show restricted and repetitive behavior or interests, criteria for social (prag- 
matic) communication disorder, instead of autism spectrum disorder, may be met. The di- 
agnosis of autism spectrum disorder supersedes that of social (pragmatic) communication 
disorder whenever the criteria for autism spectrum disorder are met, and care should be 
taken to enquire carefully regarding past or current restricted /repetitive behavior. 


Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) without autism spectrum 
disorder. Intellectual disability without autism spectrum disorder may be difficult to 
differentiate from autism spectrum disorder in very young children. Individuals with in- 
tellectual disability who have not developed language or symbolic skills also present a 
challenge for differential diagnosis, since repetitive behavior often occurs in such individ- 
uals as well. A diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder in an individual with intellectual 
disability is appropriate when social communication and interaction are significantly im- 
paired relative to the developmental level of the individual’s nonverbal skills (e.g., fine 
motor skills, nonverbal problem solving). In contrast, intellectual disability is the appropri- 
ate diagnosis when there is no apparent discrepancy between the level of social-commu- 
nicative skills and other intellectual skills. 


Stereotypic movement disorder. Motor stereotypies are among the diagnostic charac- 
teristics of autism spectrum disorder, so an additional diagnosis of stereotypic movement 
disorder is not given when such repetitive behaviors are better explained by the presence 
of autism spectrum disorder. However, when stereotypies cause self-injury and become a 
focus of treatment, both diagnoses may be appropriate. 


Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Abnormalities of attention (overly focused or 
easily distracted) are common in individuals with autism spectrum disorder, as is hy- 
peractivity. A diagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) should be 
considered when attentional difficulties or hyperactivity exceeds that typically seen in in- 
dividuals of comparable mental age. 


Schizophrenia. Schizophrenia with childhood onset usually develops after a period of 
normal, or near normal, development. A prodromal state has been described in which so- 
cial impairment and atypical interests and beliefs occur, which could be confused with the 
social deficits seen in autism spectrum disorder. Hallucinations and delusions, which are 
defining features of schizophrenia, are not features of autism spectrum disorder. How- 
ever, clinicians must take into account the potential for individuals with autism spectrum 
disorder to be concrete in their interpretation of questions regarding the key features of 
schizophrenia (e.g., “Do you hear voices when no one is there?” ”Yes [on the radio]”). 


Comorbidity 


Autism spectrum disorder is frequently associated with intellectual impairment and struc- 
tural language disorder (i.e., an inability to comprehend and construct sentences with proper 
grammar), which should be noted under the relevant specifiers when applicable. Many in- 
dividuals with autism spectrum disorder have psychiatric symptoms that do not form part of 
the diagnostic criteria for the disorder (about 70% of individuals with autism spectrum dis- 
order may have one comorbid mental disorder, and 40% may have two or more comorbid 
mental disorders). When criteria for both ADHD and autism spectrum disorder are met, both 
diagnoses should be given. This same principle applies to concurrent diagnoses of autism 
spectrum disorder and developmental coordination disorder, anxiety disorders, depressive 


Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 59 


disorders, and other comorbid diagnoses. Among individuals who are nonverbal or have 
language deficits, observable signs such as changes in sleep or eating and increases in chal- 
lenging behavior should trigger an evaluation for anxiety or depression. Specific learning dif- 
ficulties (literacy and numeracy) are common, as is developmental coordination disorder. 
Medical conditions commonly associated with autism spectrum disorder should be noted 
under the “associated with a known medical/ genetic or environmental/acquired condition” 
specifier. Such medical conditions include epilepsy, sleep problems, and constipation. 
Avoidant-restrictive food intake disorder is a fairly frequent presenting feature of autism 
spectrum disorder, and extreme and narrow food preferences may persist. 


Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity 
Disorder 


Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 


Diagnostic Criteria 


A. A persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with 
functioning or development, as characterized by (1) and/or (2): 


1. Inattention: Six (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted for at least 
6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with developmental level and that nega- 
tively impacts directly on social and academic/occupational activities: 

Note: The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behavior, defi- 
ance, hostility, or failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older adolescents 
and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are required. 


a. Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes in 
schoolwork, at work, or during other activities (e.g., overlooks or misses details, 
work is inaccurate). 

b. Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities (e.g., has diffi- 
culty remaining focused during lectures, conversations, or lengthy reading). 

c. Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly (e.g., mind seems else- 
where, even in the absence of any obvious distraction). 

d. Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish schoolwork, 
chores, or duties in the workplace (e.g., starts tasks but quickly loses focus and 
is easily sidetracked). 

e. Often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities (e.g., difficulty managing se- 
quential tasks; difficulty keeping materials and belongings in order; messy, dis- 
organized work; has poor time management; fails to meet deadlines). 

f. Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that require sustained 
mental effort (e.g., schoolwork or homework; for older adolescents and adults, 
preparing reports, completing forms, reviewing lengthy papers). 

g. Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g., school materials, pen- 
cils, books, tools, wallets, keys, paperwork, eyeglasses, mobile telephones). 

h. Is often easily distracted by extraneous stimuli (for older adolescents and 
adults, may include unrelated thoughts). 

i. Is often forgetful in daily activities (e.g., doing chores, running errands; for older 
adolescents and adults, returning calls, paying bills, keeping appointments). 


60 


Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


2. Hyperactivity and impulsivity: Six (or more) of the following symptoms have per- 
sisted for at least 6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with developmental level 
and that negatively impacts directly on social and academic/occupational activities: 
Note: The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behavior, defi- 
ance, hostility, or a failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older adolescents 
and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are required. 


a. Often fidgets with or taps hands or feet or squirms in seat. 

b. Often leaves seat in situations when remaining seated is expected (e.g., leaves 
his or her place in the classroom, in the office or other workplace, or in other 
situations that require remaining in place). 

c. Often runs about or climbs in situations where it is inappropriate. (Note: In ad- 
olescents or adults, may be limited to feeling restless.) 

d. Often unable to play or engage in leisure activities quietly. 

e. Is often “on the go,” acting as if “driven by a motor” (e.g., is unable to be or un- 
comfortable being still for extended time, as in restaurants, meetings; may be 
experienced by others as being restless or difficult to keep up with). 

f. Often talks excessively. 

g. Often blurts out an answer before a question has been completed (e.g., com- 
pletes people’s sentences; cannot wait for turn in conversation). 

h. Often has difficulty waiting his or her turn (e.g., while waiting in line). 

i. Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into conversations, games, or 
activities; may start using other people’s things without asking or receiving per- 
mission; for adolescents and adults, may intrude into or take over what others 
are doing). 


Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms were present prior to age 
12 years. 


. Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms are present in two or more set- 


tings (e.g., at home, school, or work; with friends or relatives; in other activities). 


. There is clear evidence that the symptoms interfere with, or reduce the quality of, so- 


cial, academic, or occupational functioning. 

The symptoms do not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or another 
psychotic disorder and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., mood 
disorder, anxiety disorder, dissociative disorder, personality disorder, substance intox- 
ication or withdrawal). 


Specify whether: 


314.01 (F90.2) Combined presentation: If both Criterion A1 (inattention) and Crite- 
rion A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) are met for the past 6 months. 

314.00 (F90.0) Predominantly inattentive presentation: If Criterion A1 (inattention) 
is met but Criterion A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) is not met for the past 6 months. 
314.01 (F90.1) Predominantly hyperactive/impulsive presentation: If Criterion A2 (hy- 
peractivity-impulsivity) is met and Criterion A1 (inattention) is not met for the past 6 months. 


Specify if: 


In partial remission: When full criteria were previously met, fewer than the full criteria 
have been met for the past 6 months, and the symptoms still result in impairment in 
social, academic, or occupational functioning. 


Specify current severity: 


Mild: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis are 
present, and symptoms result in no more than minor impairments in social or occupa- 
tional functioning. 

Moderate: Symptoms or functional impairment between “mild” and “severe” are present. 


Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 61 


Severe: Many symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis, or several 
symptoms that are particularly severe, are present, or the symptoms result in marked 
impairment in social or occupational functioning. 


Diagnostic Features 


The essential feature of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a persistent 
pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or 
development. Inattention manifests behaviorally in ADHD as wandering off task, lacking 
persistence, having difficulty sustaining focus, and being disorganized and is not due to 
defiance or lack of comprehension. Hyperactivity refers to excessive motor activity (such as 
a child running about) when it is not appropriate, or excessive fidgeting, tapping, or talk- 
ativeness. In adults, hyperactivity may manifest as extreme restlessness or wearing others 
out with their activity. Impulsivity refers to hasty actions that occur in the moment without 
forethought and that have high potential for harm to the individual (e.g., darting into the 
street without looking). Impulsivity may reflect a desire for immediate rewards or an in- 
ability to delay gratification. Impulsive behaviors may manifest as social intrusiveness 
(e.g., interrupting others excessively) and/or as making important decisions without con- 
sideration of long-term consequences (e.g., taking a job without adequate information). 

ADHD begins in childhood. The requirement that several symptoms be present before 
age 12 years conveys the importance of a substantial clinical presentation during child- 
hood. At the same time, an earlier age at onset is not specified because of difficulties in es- 
tablishing precise childhood onset retrospectively. Adult recall of childhood symptoms 
tends to be unreliable, and it is beneficial to obtain ancillary information. 

Manifestations of the disorder must be present in more than one setting (e.g., home and 
school, work). Confirmation of substantial symptoms across settings typically cannot be 
done accurately without consulting informants who have seen the individual in those set- 
tings. Typically, symptoms vary depending on context within a given setting. Signs of the 
disorder may be minimal or absent when the individual is receiving frequent rewards for 
appropriate behavior, is under close supervision, is in a novel setting, is engaged in espe- 
cially interesting activities, has consistent external stimulation (e.g., via electronic screens), 
or is interacting in one-on-one situations (e.g., the clinician's office). 


Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 


Mild delays in language, motor, or social development are not specific to ADHD but often co- 
occur. Associated features may include low frustration tolerance, irritability, or mood lability. 
Even in the absence of a specific learning disorder, academic or work performance is often im- 
paired. Inattentive behavior is associated with various underlying cognitive processes, and in- 
dividuals with ADHD may exhibit cognitive problems on tests of attention, executive 
function, or memory, although these tests are not sufficiently sensitive or specific to serve as di- 
agnostic indices. By early adulthood, ADHD is associated with an increased risk of suicide at- 
tempt, primarily when comorbid with mood, conduct, or substance use disorders. 

No biological marker is diagnostic for ADHD. As a group, compared with peers, chil- 
dren with ADHD display increased slow wave electroencephalograms, reduced total 
brain volume on magnetic resonance imaging, and possibly a delay in posterior to anterior 
cortical maturation, but these findings are not diagnostic. In the uncommon cases where 
there is a known genetic cause (e.g., Fragile X syndrome, 22q11 deletion syndrome), the 
ADHD presentation should still be diagnosed. 


Prevalence 


Population surveys suggest that ADHD occurs in most cultures in about 5% of children 
and about 2.5% of adults. 


62 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


Development and Course 


Many parents first observe excessive motor activity when the child is a toddler, but symp- 
toms are difficult to distinguish from highly variable normative behaviors before age 4 
years. ADHD is most often identified during elementary school years, and inattention be- 
comes more prominent and impairing. The disorder is relatively stable through early ad- 
olescence, but some individuals have a worsened course with development of antisocial 
behaviors. In most individuals with ADHD, symptoms of motoric hyperactivity become 
less obvious in adolescence and adulthood, but difficulties with restlessness, inattention, 
poor planning, and impulsivity persist. A substantial proportion of children with ADHD 
remain relatively impaired into adulthood. 

In preschool, the main manifestation is hyperactivity. Inattention becomes more prom- 
inent during elementary school. During adolescence, signs of hyperactivity (e.g., running 
and climbing) are less common and may be confined to fidgetiness or an inner feeling of 
jitteriness, restlessness, or impatience. In adulthood, along with inattention and restless- 
ness, impulsivity may remain problematic even when hyperactivity has diminished. 


Risk and Prognostic Factors 


Temperamental. ADHD is associated with reduced behavioral inhibition, effortful con- 
trol, or constraint; negative emotionality; and/or elevated novelty seeking. These traits 
may predispose some children to ADHD but are not specific to the disorder. 


Environmental. Very low birth weight (less than 1,500 grams) conveys a two- to three- 
fold risk for ADHD, but most children with low birth weight do not develop ADHD. Al- 
though ADHD is correlated with smoking during pregnancy, some of this association 
reflects common genetic risk. A minority of cases may be related to reactions to aspects of 
diet. There may bea history of child abuse, neglect, multiple foster placements, neurotoxin 
exposure (e.g., lead), infections (e.g., encephalitis), or alcohol exposure in utero. Exposure 
to environmental toxicants has been correlated with subsequent ADHD, but it is not 
known whether these associations are causal. 


Genetic and physiological. ADHD is elevated in the first-degree biological relatives of 
individuals with ADHD. The heritability of ADHD is substantial. While specific genes 
have been correlated with ADHD, they are neither necessary nor sufficient causal factors. 
Visual and hearing impairments, metabolic abnormalities, sleep disorders, nutritional de- 
ficiencies, and epilepsy should be considered as possible influences on ADHD symptoms. 

ADHD is not associated with specific physical features, although rates of minor phys- 
ical anomalies (e.g., hypertelorism, highly arched palate, low-set ears) may be relatively 
elevated. Subtle motor delays and other neurological soft signs may occur. (Note that 
marked co-occurring clumsiness and motor delays should be coded separately [e.g., de- 
velopmental coordination disorder].) 


Course modifiers. Family interaction patterns in early childhood are unlikely to cause 
ADHD but may influence its course or contribute to secondary development of conduct 
problems. 


Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 


Differences in ADHD prevalence rates across regions appear attributable mainly to differ- 
ent diagnostic and methodological practices. However, there also may be cultural varia- 
tion in attitudes toward or interpretations of children’s behaviors. Clinical identification 
rates in the United States for African American and Latino populations tend to be lower 
than for Caucasian populations. Informant symptom ratings may be influenced by cul- 
tural group of the child and the informant, suggesting that culturally appropriate practices 
are relevant in assessing ADHD. 


Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 63 


Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues 


ADHD is more frequent in males than in females in the general population, with a ratio of 
approximately 2:1 in children and 1.6:1 in adults. Females are more likely than males to 
present primarily with inattentive features. 


Functional Consequences of 
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 


ADHD is associated with reduced school performance and academic attainment, social re- 
jection, and, in adults, poorer occupational performance, attainment, attendance, and 
higher probability of unemployment as well as elevated interpersonal conflict. Children 
with ADHD are significantly more likely than their peers without ADHD to develop con- 
duct disorder in adolescence and antisocial personality disorder in adulthood, conse- 
quently increasing the likelihood for substance use disorders and incarceration. The risk of 
subsequent substance use disorders is elevated, especially when conduct disorder or an- 
tisocial personality disorder develops. Individuals with ADHD are more likely than peers 
to be injured. Traffic accidents and violations are more frequent in drivers with ADHD. 
There may be an elevated likelihood of obesity among individuals with ADHD. 

Inadequate or variable self-application to tasks that require sustained effort is often in- 
terpreted by others as laziness, irresponsibility, or failure to cooperate. Family relation- 
ships may be characterized by discord and negative interactions. Peer relationships are 
often disrupted by peer rejection, neglect, or teasing of the individual with ADHD. On av- 
erage, individuals with ADHD obtain less schooling, have poorer vocational achievement, 
and have reduced intellectual scores than their peers, although there is great variability. In 
its severe form, the disorder is markedly impairing, affecting social, familial, and scholas- 
tic/occupational adjustment. 

Academic deficits, school-related problems, and peer neglect tend to be most associ- 
ated with elevated symptoms of inattention, whereas peer rejection and, to a lesser extent, 
accidental injury are most salient with marked symptoms of hyperactivity or impulsivity. 


Differential Diagnosis 


Oppositional defiant disorder. Individuals with oppositional defiant disorder may re- 
sist work or school tasks that require self-application because they resist conforming to 
others' demands. Their behavior is characterized by negativity, hostility, and defiance. 
These symptoms must be differentiated from aversion to school or mentally demanding 
tasks due to difficulty in sustaining mental effort, forgetting instructions, and impulsivity 
in individuals with ADHD. Complicating the differential diagnosis is the fact that some 
individuals with ADHD may develop secondary oppositional attitudes toward such tasks 
and devalue their importance. 


Intermittent explosive disorder. ADHD and intermittent explosive disorder share high 
levels of impulsive behavior. However, individuals with intermittent explosive disorder 
show serious aggression toward others, which is not characteristic of ADHD, and they do 
not experience problems with sustaining attention as seen in ADHD. In addition, intermit- 
tent explosive disorder is rare in childhood. Intermittent explosive disorder may be diag- 
nosed in the presence of ADHD. 


Other neurodevelopmental disorders. The increased motoric activity that may occur in 
ADHD must be distinguished from the repetitive motor behavior that characterizes stereo- 
typic movement disorder and some cases of autism spectrum disorder. In stereotypic 
movement disorder, the motoric behavior is generally fixed and repetitive (e.g., body rock- 
ing, self-biting), whereas the fidgetiness and restlessness in ADHD are typically general- 
ized and not characterized by repetitive stereotypic movements. In Tourette’s disorder, 


64 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


frequent multiple tics can be mistaken for the generalized fidgetiness of ADHD. Prolonged 
observation may be needed to differentiate fidgetiness from bouts of multiple tics. 


Specific learning disorder. Children with specific learning disorder may appear inat- 
tentive because of frustration, lack of interest, or limited ability. However, inattention in 
individuals with a specific learning disorder who do not have ADHD is not impairing out- 
side of academic work. 


Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder). Symptoms of ADHD are 
common among children placed in academic settings that are inappropriate to their intel- 
lectual ability. In such cases, the symptoms are not evident during non-academic tasks. A 
diagnosis of ADHD in intellectual disability requires that inattention or hyperactivity be 
excessive for mental age. 


Autism spectrum disorder. Individuals with ADHD and those with autism spectrum 
disorder exhibit inattention, social dysfunction, and difficult-to-manage behavior. The so- 
cial dysfunction and peer rejection seen in individuals with ADHD must be distinguished 
from the social disengagement, isolation, and indifference to facial and tonal communica- 
tion cues seen in individuals with autism spectrum disorder. Children with autism spec- 
trum disorder may display tantrums because of an inability to tolerate a change from their 
expected course of events. In contrast, children with ADHD may misbehave or have a tan- 
trum during a major transition because of impulsivity or poor self-control. 


Reactive attachment disorder. Children with reactive attachment disorder may show 
social disinhibition, but not the full ADHD symptom cluster, and display other features 
such as a lack of enduring relationships that are not characteristic of ADHD. 


Anxiety disorders. ADHD shares symptoms of inattention with anxiety disorders. Indi- 
viduals with ADHD are inattentive because of their attraction to external stimuli, new 
activities, or preoccupation with enjoyable activities. This is distinguished from the inat- 
tention due to worry and rumination seen in anxiety disorders. Restlessness might be seen 
in anxiety disorders. However, in ADHD, the symptom is not associated with worry and 
rumination. 


Depressive disorders. Individuals with depressive disorders may present with inabil- 
ity to concentrate. However, poor concentration in mood disorders becomes prominent 
only during a depressive episode. 


Bipolar disorder. Individuals with bipolar disorder may have increased activity, poor 
concentration, and increased impulsivity, but these features are episodic, occurring sev- 
eral days at a time. In bipolar disorder, increased impulsivity or inattention is accompa- 
nied by elevated mood, grandiosity, and other specific bipolar features. Children with 
ADHD may show significant changes in mood within the same day; such lability is dis- 
tinct from a manic episode, which must last 4 or more days to be a clinical indicator of bi- 
polar disorder, even in children. Bipolar disorder is rare in preadolescents, even when 
severe irritability and anger are prominent, whereas ADHD is common among children 
and adolescents who display excessive anger and irritability. 


Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is 
characterized by pervasive irritability, and intolerance of frustration, but impulsiveness 
and disorganized attention are not essential features. However, most children and adoles- 
cents with the disorder have symptoms that also meet criteria for ADHD, which is diag- 
nosed separately. 


Substance use disorders. Differentiating ADHD from substance use disorders may be 
problematic if the first presentation of ADHD symptoms follows the onset of abuse or fre- 
quent use. Clear evidence of ADHD before substance misuse from informants or previous 
records may be essential for differential diagnosis. 


Other Specified Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 65 


Personality disorders. In adolescents and adults, it may be difficult to distinguish ADHD 
from borderline, narcissistic, and other personality disorders. All these disorders tend to 
share the features of disorganization, social intrusiveness, emotional dysregulation, and 
cognitive dysregulation. However, ADHD is not characterized by fear of abandonment, 
self-injury, extreme ambivalence, or other features of personality disorder. It may take 
extended clinical observation, informant interview, or detailed history to distinguish im- 
pulsive, socially intrusive, or inappropriate behavior from narcissistic, aggressive, or dom- 
ineering behavior to make this differential diagnosis. 


Psychotic disorders. ADHD is not diagnosed if the symptoms of inattention and hyperac- 
tivity occur exclusively during the course of a psychotic disorder. 


Medication-induced symptoms of ADHD. Symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, or 
impulsivity attributable to the use of medication (e.g., bronchodilators, isoniazid, neuro- 
leptics [resulting in akathisia], thyroid replacement medication) are diagnosed as other 
specified or unspecified other (or unknown) substance-related disorders. 


Neurocognitive disorders. Early major neurocognitive disorder (dementia) and/or 
mild neurocognitive disorder are not known to be associated with ADHD but may present 
with similar clinical features. These conditions are distinguished from ADHD by their late 
onset. 


Comorbidity 


In clinical settings, comorbid disorders are frequent in individuals whose symptoms meet 
criteria for ADHD. In the general population, oppositional defiant disorder co-occurs with 
ADHD in approximately half of children with the combined presentation and about a 
quarter with the predominantly inattentive presentation. Conduct disorder co-occurs in 
about a quarter of children or adolescents with the combined presentation, depending on 
age and setting. Most children and adolescents with disruptive mood dysregulation dis- 
order have symptoms that also meet criteria for ADHD; a lesser percentage of children 
with ADHD have symptoms that meet criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disor- 
der. Specific learning disorder commonly co-occurs with ADHD. Anxiety disorders and 
major depressive disorder occur in a minority of individuals with ADHD but more often 
than in the general population. Intermittent explosive disorder occurs in a minority of 
adults with ADHD, but at rates above population levels. Although substance use disor- 
ders are relatively more frequent among adults with ADHD in the general population, the 
disorders are present in only a minority of adults with ADHD. In adults, antisocial and 
other personality disorders may co-occur with ADHD. Other disorders that may co-occur 
with ADHD include obsessive-compulsive disorder, tic disorders, and autism spectrum 
disorder. 


Other Specified Attention-Deficit/ 
Hyperactivity Disorder 


314.01 (F90.8) 


This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of attention- 
deficit/hyperactivity disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in so- 
cial, occupational or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the 
full criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or any of the disorders in the neuro- 
developmental disorders diagnostic class. The other specified attention-deficit/hyperactiv- 
ity disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate 


66 Neurodevelopmental Disorders 


the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for attention-deficit/ 
hyperactivity disorder or any specific neurodevelopmental disorder. This is done by re- 
cording “other specified attention-deficit/nyperactivity disorder” followed by the specific 
reason (e.g., “with insufficient inattention symptoms’). 


Unspecified Attention-Deficit/ 
Hyperactivity Disorder 


314.01 (F90.9) 


This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of attention- 
deficit/hyperactivity disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in so- 
cial, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the 
full criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or any of the disorders in the neuro- 
developmental disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the rea- 
son that the criteria are not met for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or for a specific 
neurodevelopmental disorder, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient in- 
formation to make a more specific diagnosis. 

